---
title: 4th of July
layout: post
tags: post
id: 98f49d62
permalink: /blog/98f49d62/
---

> **NOTE:** I posted the following thoughts in Twitter form earlier today, but I wanted to post them in long form here. Enjoy.

Happy 4th! I still believe in the American ideals, even if I don't believe in half of the American people right now. Remember, while your white nationalist neighbors are celebrating, that patriotism does not equal racism or bigotry of any kind. All humans are equal. Such bigots may _think_ they're being patriotic, but they actually don't believe _enough_ in the Constitution's values of equality. The same goes for Christian zealots who use America's heritage as a way to oppress religious minorities and attempt to marry church and state. May we learn to live up to our own ideals, and may we make America kind and noble and just and fair again. Let's "make America great again," but not in ways that increase inequality and injustice or that foment division or incite violence. Here are some relevant quotes from Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.

- "Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that."
- "Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere."
- "I look to a day when people will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character."
- "Any religion that professes to be concerned about the souls of men and is not concerned about the slums that damn them, the economic conditions that strangle them, and the social conditions that cripple them is a spiritually moribund religion awaiting burial."

Sorry for being so preachy; it's just that there seem to be so many people for whom common decency and kindness are foreign concepts. I'm really thankful for those that are right now on the front lines of the struggle for "truth, justice, and the American way." I appreciate people from all parties who are willing to do the hard, uncomfortable work of reaching across the aisle and working together. I appreciate journalists and media organizations who work hard to shine the light of truth on corruption, incompetence, and dishonesty. I appreciate those who work hard to serve the public interests instead of their own interests, even if I sometimes disagree with particular policies. Okay, now I have to leave to do family things, so I suppose I'll wrap up this thread now. Thanks for tuning in. Happy 4th!
